The SLAC Rubin Operations Center | RTN-035 | Latest Revision Date 2022-04-22 C:\Users\robm\Pictures\Colorized RGB - use over white-trimmed.png 
The Rubin Operations Center at SLAC


Phil Marshall, Stuart Marshall, Tony Johnson, 
Richard Dubois, Seth Digel and others
RTN-035
Latest Revision Date: April 22, 2022


  

Change Record 
Release
	Date
	Description
	Owner Name
	0.1
	2022-04-22
	Initial outline
	Phil Marshall
	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

Table of Contents
Change Record        1
Executive Summary        4
Definitions of Terms        5
Reference Documents        5
Overview        1
Key User Groups        1
Use Cases        3
Use Case Template: Summary of Activity (Timeframe)        3
Use Case 1: Remote Observing Support During Survey Operations (FY25 onwards)        4
Use Case 2: Remote Observing Support During Commissioning (FY23-FY24)        5
Use Case 3: Observing Specialist Training (Starting Fall 2022)        5
Use Case: Remote Camera Control System Support (FY23 onwards)        5
Use Case: USDF Processing Monitoring (Starting Winter 2023)        5
Use Case: Rubin Operations Team Collaborative Work        5
Use Case: LSST DESC Sprint        5
Use Case: SLAC Public Tour        5
Center Components and Requirements        6
Current FKB 1st Floor Plan        6
Rubin Summit Facility Control Room        8
Implementation Plan        8
Center Design Validation and User Testing        8
Operational Instructions        9


The Rubin Operations Center at SLAC
Executive Summary
As one of the operating partners for Rubin Operations, SLAC is responsible for the stewardship of the LSST Camera: SLAC staff will provide scientific and technical support for LSST Cam operations at the Summit Facility in Chile, and SLAC Observing Specialists will perform night-time operations both on-site and remotely. To fulfill these obligations, SLAC will need (and has budgeted for) a remote observing room (providing a direct video link and mirrored views of the observatory controls at the Rubin Summit Facility), and associated collaboration space. In this design document we derive the specifications of this remote observing room as the central component of a more general, multi-purpose Rubin Operations Center, situated in the 1st floor of the Kavli Building at SLAC. This Center will support collaboration by others in the Rubin Operations team (including the staff processing the LSST image data at the Rubin US Data Facility), and with members of the LSST Dark Enerrgy Science Collaboration. It will also act as a hub for the wider KIPAC community as it does science with the LSST data, and be a major destination for visitors on lab tours and other public outreach events. 
Currently, this is a working design document  - as you can see, we are using it to document the Center’s use cases and specifications as we develop them. When the design has been implemented, this document will have evolved to serve as a record of our design decisions.
________________
Definitions of Terms 
FKB – Fred Kavli Building (051) at SLAC
ROO – Rubin Observatory Operations, a department within Rubin Operations
RDP – Rubin Data Production, a department within Rubin Operations
I&S – Infrastructure and Support Team, a team in RDP
ROR – Remote Observing Room


Reference Documents 
“051 1st Floor.pdf” (SLAC Building and Space Management Geographic Information System)


The SLAC Rubin Operations Center
Overview
High-level overview of the design, and the goals the design seeks to accomplish. This section should make clear  the purpose of the center.
Key User Groups
In this section, we gather and present relevant information about the Center’s target users, to help us understand who those users are, and what good Center design means to them (via their functional and aesthetic preferences). Elsewhere in this document we refer to this section for the rationale behind individual Center design decisions.
The ROO SLAC Observing Specialists and Observatory Science Team. This group contains the heaviest users of the ROR. The SLAC Obs Specs will need to support night time operations from SLAC (in 20% of their time back at SLAC after they finish their deployments to Chile). The Camera Support Scientists at SLAC will use the ROR to provide occasional remote support for night time operations, and to interact with Summit staff during the day. They will also use the ROR to train the SLAC Obs Specs on Camera operations before they deploy to Chile. 
The ROO Camera Control Software Engineers. The CCS group at SLAC may use the ROR for troubleshooting, evolving and testing the Camera Control Software, when a larger format monitor or video link than a laptop gives is needed (eg to support wider collaboration).
The Rubin/SLAC US Data Facility Staff.  The RDP Infrastructure & Support Team includes a number of SLAC-based groups who will need to collaborate with remote colleagues to transfer and process the LSST data. The RDP Data Curation Group and RDP Processing Group may benefit from data visualization and large-format video link capabilities of an Operations Center, as well as a dedicated collaboration space in which to meet with other local US Data Facility staff (eg from the TID Shared Data Facility) or those at Fermilab, Brookhaven, Rubin HQ in Tucson, and the Base and Summit facilities in Chile. 
The LSST DESC. SLAC regularly hosts members of the LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration who visit in order to collaborate with SLAC staff.  Demand for such visits is likely to increase as we enter survey operations, and the collaboration investigates systematic errors in its early cosmology analysis. Visits may be long term (eg several months, by DOE graduate student fellows, or faculty on sabbatical) as well as short (eg a few days). SLAC staff routinely interact with the LSST DESC working groups via zoom calls, which could be usefully taken in group hybrid mode in a meeting room with projector. DESC runs annual Sprint Weeks, which have been moving towards a multi-site hybrid format: each hub needs to support 10-20 visitors all working in close proximity, while connected via good video links to the others.
The KIPAC LSST Science Community. As well as the SLAC staff, many other KIPAC members will be carrying out analyses of the LSST data. These scientists are able to interact with and learn from the dedicated Rubin staff  at venues such as the KEG and Rubin@SLAC meeting series. 
SLAC Public Tour Groups. SLAC regularly hosts groups of schoolchildren and members of the general public, providing tours of the lab facilities. The Rubin Operations Center will be an appealing stop on these tours, offering the visitors a window into how Rubin images are acquired and processed, and how its scientists and engineers work together. They will be inspired by Rubin and its connections to SLAC, including the construction and operation of the world’s largest digital camera.




________________
Use Cases
How do we expect the various user groups to use the Center? In this section we present a set of use cases, that sketch out these expectations and allow us to derive the features of the Center’s design.  The template for these use cases, with guidelines on what to include, is given below.[a] 
Use Case Template: Summary of Activity (Timeframe)
Preamble. Provide any needed high level introduction to this use case. This is probably best done after filling out the bullet points below.
* Local Actors: List of primary roles (and current staff names, as appropriate) of people using the center in person (at SLAC).  
* Remote Actors: List of primary roles (and current staff names, as appropriate) of people using the center by video (eg at the Summit Facility, from Tucson, at various DESC institutions etc).
* Scenario: Brief description of the activity, including when (in the day) it starts and ends, what interactions are involved, what hardware and software are used, etc.
* Possible Failure Modes: Brief notes on how things could go wrong, if the space or technology provided is somehow inadequate.
* Space Needs: Brief notes on how much space is needed and what its properties are, given the scenario and failure modes above. Include private vs open, security level needed, furniture required, lighting, sound, hospitality, etc. These will drive the requirements of the Center.
* Tech Needs: Brief notes on what kinds of equipment are needed, given the scenario and failure modes above. Include computers, screens, projectors, network connections, special installations etc. These will drive the requirements of the Center.
________________




Use Case 1: Remote Observing Support During Survey Operations (FY25 onwards)
This is the primary use case of the remote observing room (ROR) part of the Center.
* Local Actors: SLAC Observing Specialist(s) (e.g. Yijung Kang and Shuang Liang, at SLAC FY25-FY26).  
* Remote Actors: NOIRLab and SLAC Observing Specialists and other Rubin staff at the Summit Facility, other Rubin Ops staff (in La Serena, Tucson, or the Bay Area) on call.
* Scenario: SLAC Observing Specialist(s)in the remote observing room (ROR) from c. 1500 CLT = 1200 PDT (to support Summit Facility staff doing afternoon calibrations) through the night shift, which ends c. 0800 CLT = 0500 PDT. SLAC Obs Specs use dedicated video link to talk to Summit staff, and view the same kinds of display monitors (eg LOVE, weather display, telescope and instrument status screens etc) as in the Summit Control Room to help diagnose problems. Access to the various Rubin control systems (CCS, OCS etc)  is enabled via secure login to enable remote SLAC Obs Specs to provide cover for Summit Obs Specs (eg while they investigate problems elsewhere in the dome). 
* Possible Failure Modes: The Rubin controls could be mis-used if not sufficiently protected (eg if a lone SLAC Obs Spec leaves a monitor unattended, or if no login screen is used). Balance against SLAC Obs Spec inefficiency and frustration if they have to keep repeatedly logging in (to get past screensavers etc). Video communication with the Summit could be difficult if there is a lot of background noise in the ROR. 
* Space Needs: There are multiple Summit Facility Control Room displays (see Figure below) in a sizeable space (see Figure below). The SLAC ROR needs to contain enough monitors, and operator seats, to enable the SLAC Obs Specs and other SLAC staff to work together with the Summit staff.  The ROR can be open to the Center, but monitors showing control system interfaces will need to be password-protected and guarded when in use, and the background noise during California afternoons and evenings will need to be kept to a minimum. Desks with comfortable chairs for 4 operations staff are needed, with good views of all monitors and the video link. A book case to hold reference manuals may be needed.
* Tech Needs: Monitors and computers as advised by ROO in order to enable sufficient emulation of the Summit Facility Control Room. Network connection must be high enough to enable video traffic at required volume, with very high reliability. A dedicated video communication system is needed. Requirements on all the above equipment need to be collected from Rubin. A coffee machine, fridge and microwave are all needed in a nearby kitchen (preferably inside the Center).


Use Case 2: Remote Observing Support During Commissioning (FY23-FY24)
We distinguish this case from the remote observing support use case in survey operations, because it might be that not all the equipment is needed in the ROR during this period.
Use Case 3: Observing Specialist Training (Starting Fall 2022)
Use Case: Remote Camera Control System Support (FY23 onwards)
Use Case: USDF Processing Monitoring (Starting Winter 2023)
Use Case: Rubin Operations Team Collaborative Work
Use Case: LSST DESC Sprint
Use Case: SLAC Public Tour


________________
Center Components and Requirements
From the use cases above, and from some additional constraints and assumptions, we now derive the design of the Center. Constraints include the current layout of the FKB 1st Floor area, and the layout and contents of the Summit Facility Control Room that the SLAC ROR will need to connect to and emulate. Our plan has a number of components: for each one, we list the technical  requirements of its design. The components of the SLAC Rubin Operations Center are:
* Remote Observing Room (ROR)
* Collaboration Area 
* Visitor Space
* Public Access 
Current FKB 1st Floor Plan 
Figure 1 shows the current layout of cubicles, 2 lockable (but open-ceiling) offices, and a central huddle room, plus the two entrances to the space. The front door opens into a hallway behind the auditorium, which has a door to the outside at its North end. The back door opens into a corridor which leads to the stairs up to the 2nd and 3rd floors.
  

Figure 1: Current floorplan of the 1st floor of the Fred Kavli Building (051) at SLAC, adapted from the .
Rubin Summit Facility Control Room
Below we show a set of figures illustrating the size and contents of the Summit Facility Control Room.
  
 
Figure 2: View of the Summit Facility Control Room LOVE displays during an AuxTel run.
Remote Observing Room Requirements
Collaboration Area Requirements
Visitor Space Requirements
Public Access Requirements
Implementation Plan
In this section, we will provide a  high-level overview of the steps required to complete the implementation of the design of the Center.
Center Design Validation and User Testing
Here we will provide an overview of the practices to be executed during the Center design cycle, as well as steps to be taken after the Center has been opened to verify that it satisfies the user groups’ needs.
Operational Instructions
In this section we will describe how to perform some common operational tasks at the Center. These descriptions will be revised to include more detail as the Center is developed.






[a]Use Case 1 serves as a first example. Both this template and first example should be reviewed and improved before we build out more use cases.